title=Yao
tags=platform, low-code
summary=A low code engine to create web services and dashboard
~~~~~~

[Website](https://yaoapps.com/en-US) | [Source](https://github.com/YaoApp/yao) (Golang) | [Docs](https://yaoapps.com/en-US/doc/a.Introduction/a.Getting%20Started) | Demos: [Customer Relationship Management System](https://demo-crm.yaoapps.com): A Customer Relationship Management System; [Intelligent warehouse management system](https://demo-wms.yaoapps.com): An example of cloud + edge IoT application, an unattended intelligent warehouse management system that supports face recognition and RFID.

## Features
No Code: Using JSON to create database model, write interface and describe interface is really codeless programming.

IoT: Yao supports running on ARM devices and can be used in IoT, edge computing, industrial Internet.

Business Intelligence: Easy-to-use BI components and functions, empowering business with more possibilities.

Processes: Yao has many built-in processes, and a series of processes that can be created by data flow, Javascirpt, and GRPC plugin.

Dataflow: Through data flow, developers can process data in any form and support JavaScript.

Plugins: The plug-in mechanism based on grpc supports function expansion using Nodejs, Python and other languages.

Dashboard: By writing JSON description interface layout to build various CRM, ERP, and other enterprise internal systems.

File System Routing: Every file in the apis folder will become an interface that can be called, this will be helpful for large scale project.

Query Engine: Built in query engine comparable to es, and JSON query is realized through DSL, which is simple and easy to use.

Performance: The performance is far better than that of Java and PHP. It is distributed and can be done with one line of command.

Enterprise Security: Permission classification, separation of administrator and employee accounts, API level permission control.

Natural Distribution: Generating binary files for various platforms, which is very convenient for users who need to go to the cloud.

"Yao allows developers to create web services by processes. Yao is a low-code engine that creates a database model, writes API services, and describes dashboard interface just by JSON for web & hardware, no code, and 10x productivity. Yao is based on the flow-based programming idea, developed in the Go language, and supports multiple ways to expand the data stream processor. This makes Yao extremely versatile, which can replace programming languages ​​in most scenarios, and is 10 times more efficient than traditional programming languages ​​in terms of reusability and coding efficiency; application performance and resource ratio Better than PHP, JAVA and other languages.

"Yao has a built-in data management system. By writing JSON to describe the interface layout, 90% of the common interface interaction functions can be realized. It is especially suitable for quickly making various management background, CRM, ERP and other internal enterprise systems. Special interactive functions can also be implemented by writing extension components or HTML pages. The built-in management system is not coupled with Yao, and any front-end technologies such as VUE and React can be used to implement the management interface."

#### Install
Run the script under terminal: (MacOS/Linux) `curl -fsSL https://website.yaoapps.com/install.sh | bash`

#### Step 1: Create a project
Create a new project directory, enter the project directory, and run the yao init command to create a blank Yao application.

```
mkdir -p /data/crm # create project directory
cd /data/crm # Enter the project directory
yao init # run the initializer
```

After the command runs successfully, the app.json file , db, ui , data and other directories will be created

```
├── data # Used to store files generated by the application, such as pictures, PDFs, etc.
├── db # Used to store SQLite database files
│ └── yao.db
└── ui # The static file server file directory, where custom front-end products can be placed. The files in this directory can be accessed through http://host:port/filename .
└── app.json # Application configuration file, used to define the application name, etc.
```

#### Step 2: Create the data table
Use the yao migrate command to create the data table, open the command line terminal, run in the project root directory:

```
yao migrate
```

initialization menu

```
yao run flows.setmenu
```

#### Step 3: Start the service
Open a command line terminal, run `yao start` in the project root directory. Open a browser, visit https://127.0.0.1:5099/xiang/login/admin, Enter the default username: xiang@iqka.com, password: A123456p+

