title=Bosque
tags=clr, language, research
summary=A language rethinking intermediate representation/bytecode to be more tool-friendly.
~~~~~~
"The Bosque Programming Language project is a ground up language & tooling co-design effort focused on is investigating the theoretical and the practical implications of:

* Explicitly designing a code intermediate representation language (or bytecode) that enables deep automated code reasoning and the deployment of next-generation development tools, compilers, and runtime systems.
* Leveraging the power of the intermediate representation to provide a programming language that is both easily accessible to modern developers and that provides a rich set of useful language features for developing high reliability & high performance applications.
* Taking a cloud-development first perspective on programming to address emerging challenges as we move into a distributed cloud development model based around microservices, serverless, and RESTful architectures.

"In the Bosque project we ask the question of what happens if the IR is designed explicitly to support the rich needs of automated code reasoning, IDE tooling, etc. With this novel IR first perspective we are exploring a new way to think about and build a language intermediate representation and tools that utilize it. Our initial experiments show that this empowers a range of next-generation experiences including symbolic-testing, enhanced fuzzing, soft-realtime compilation with stable GC support, API auto-marshaling, and more!

"The Bosque Programming Language builds on the strengths of classical Functional Programming,  modern TypeScript/Node.js, and the power of the new IR. The result is a language that simultaneously supports the kind of high productivity development experience available to modern developers while also providing a resource efficient and predictable runtime, scaling from small IoT up to heavily loaded cloud services. In addition to bringing all the expressive power expected from a modern language, the Bosque language also introduces several novel features like Typed Strings and API Types, that directly address challenges faced by developers working in a distributed cloud based world."

[Website](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/bosque-programming-language/) | [Github](https://github.com/Microsoft/BosqueLanguage)

#### Publications
[Regularized Programming with the Bosque Language](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2019/04/beyond_structured_report_v2.pdf): "The rise of Structured Programming and Abstract Data Types in the 1970’s represented a major shift in programming languages. These methodologies represented a move away from a programming model that reflected incidental features of the underlying hardware architecture and toward a model that emphasized programmer intent more directly. This shift simultaneously made it easier and less error prone for a developer to convert their mental model of a system into code and led to a golden age of compiler and IDE tooling development. This paper takes another step on this path by further lifting the model for iterative processing away from low-level loop actions, enriching the language with algebraic data transformation operators, and further simplifying the problem of reasoning about program behavior by removing incidental ties to a particular computational substrate and indeterminate behaviors. We believe that, just as structured programming did years ago, this regularized programming model will lead to massively improved developer productivity, increased software quality, and enable a second golden age of developments in compilers and developer tooling."
